Engdocs 1067 (#16585)
docker/docs: compose/environment-variables/set-environment-variables.md

---
title: Ways to set environment variables in Compose
description: How to set, use and manage environment variables in Compose
keywords: compose, orchestration, environment, env file
redirect_from:
- /compose/env/
- /compose/link-env-deprecated/
---

Environment variables are dealt with by either the Compose file or the CLI. Both have multiple ways you can substitute in or set, your environment variables. This is outlined below. 

## Compose file

### Substitute with an `.env` file

The `.env` file is useful if you have multiple environment variables you need to store.

Below is a simple example: 

```console
$ cat .env
TAG=v1.5

$ cat docker-compose.yml
services:
  web:
    image: "webapp:${TAG}"
```

When you run `docker compose up`, the `web` service defined in the Compose file substitues in the
image `webapp:v1.5` which was set in the `.env` file. You can verify this with the
[convert command](../../engine/reference/commandline/compose_convert.md), which prints your resolved application config to the terminal:

```console
$ docker compose convert

services:
  web:
    image: 'webapp:v1.5'
```

> The `.env` file is placed at the base of the project directory where you intend to run the `docker compose` command. You can alternatively call upon the file by either using:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `.env` file should be placed at the root of the project directory next to `docker-compose.yaml`. You can use an alternative path by one of the following methods:
```

- The [`--file` option in the CLI](../reference/index.md#use--f-to-specify-name-and-path-of-one-or-more-compose-files) 
- The [`- -env-file` option in the CLI](#substitute-with---env-file)
- Using the [`env_file` attribute in the Compose file](../compose-file/index.md#env_file)

For more information on formatting an environment file, see [Use an environment file](env-file.md).

> **Important**
>

> >The `.env` file feature only works when you use the `docker compose up` command and does not work with `docker stack deploy`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Substitution from `.env` files is a Docker Compose CLI feature.
>
> It is not supported by Swarm when running `docker stack deploy`.
```

(cc @ndeloof @glours for accuracy)

{: .important}

### Use the `environment` attribute

You can set environment variables in a service's containers with the
[`environment` attribute](../compose-file/index.md#environment) in your Compose file. It works in the same way as `docker run -e VARIABLE=VALUE ...`

```yaml
web:
  environment:
    - DEBUG=1
```

You can choose not to set a value and pass the environment variables from your shell straight through to a
service's containers. It works in the same way as `docker run -e VARIABLE ...`:

```yaml
web:
  environment:
    - DEBUG
```

The value of the `DEBUG` variable in the container is taken from the value for the same variable in the shell in which Compose is run.

See [`environment` attribute](../compose-file/index.md#environment) for more information.

### Use the `env_file` attribute

You can pass multiple environment variables from an external file through to
a service's containers with the [`env_file` option](../compose-file/index.md#env_file). This works in the same way as `docker run --env-file=FILE ...`:

```yaml
web:
  env_file:
    - web-variables.env
```

> **Note**
>

> >With this option, environment variables declared in the file cannot then be referenced again separately in the Compose file or used to configure Compose.

Reviewer 2: What do you mean here?  That we can't use the value set in those files to define a image name in the compose file, for example such as `image: my-image:${TAG}` ?

Author: Yes   
 Or does it not matter coz precedence rules will kick in? Shall I remove it?

Reviewer 2: Why not having something like this:
```suggestion
>With this option, environment variables declared in those files cannot be used as reference in the Compose file or to configure Compose.
```
WDYT @aevesdocker ?

> See [`env_file` attribute](../compose-file/index.md#env_file) for more information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If multiple files are specified, they are evaluated in order and can override values set in previous files.

See [`env_file` attribute](../compose-file/index.md#env_file) for more information.
```

## CLI

### Substitute with `--env-file`

You can set default values for multiple environment variables, in an [environment file](env-file.md) and then pass the file as an argument in the CLI.

The advantage of this method is that you can store the file anywhere and name it appropriately, for example, `.env.ci`, `.env.dev`, `.env.prod`. This file path is relative to the current working directory where the Docker Compose command is executed. Passing the file path is done using the `--env-file` option:

```console
$ docker compose --env-file ./config/.env.dev up
```

In the example below, there are two environment files, `.env` and `.env.dev`. Both have different values set for `TAG`. 

```console
$ cat .env
TAG=v1.5

$ cat ./config/.env.dev
TAG=v1.6

$ cat docker-compose.yml
services:
  web:
    image: "webapp:${TAG}"
```

If the `--env-file` is not used in the command line, the `.env` file is loaded by default:

```console
$ docker compose convert
services:
  web:
    image: 'webapp:v1.5'
```

Passing the `--env-file` argument overrides the default file path:

```console

> $ docker compose --env-file ./config/.env.dev config

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ docker compose --env-file ./config/.env.dev convert
```

services:
  web:
    image: 'webapp:v1.6'
```

When an invalid file path is being passed as an `--env-file` argument, Compose returns an error:

```console

> $ docker compose --env-file ./doesnotexist/.env.dev  config

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ docker compose --env-file ./doesnotexist/.env.dev convert
```

ERROR: Couldn't find env file: /home/user/./doesnotexist/.env.dev
```

> **Important**
>
> Values set in the shell environment override those set when using the `--env-file` argument in the CLI. For more information, see [Environment variable precedence](envvars-precedence.md)

> ### Set environment variables with `docker compose run -e`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Set environment variables with `docker compose run --env`
```

> ### Set environment variables with 'docker compose run -e'

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Set environment variables with `docker compose run -e`
```

> Similar to `docker run -e`, you can set environment variables in a one-off
> container with `docker compose run -e`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similar to `docker run --env`, you can set environment variables in a one-off
container with `docker compose run --env` or its short form, `docker compose run -e`:
```
